Intro to computer networking (#16)
Kalschatzi/learning_platform: content/module2/2-tcp-and-udp.md

+++
title = "TCP and UDP - the building blocks of the internet"
type = ""
weight = 2
+++
 

> There are 2 main protocols the internet is based on, TCP(Transmission Control Protocol) and UDP (User Datagram Protocol)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two main protocols the internet is based on, TCP (Transmission Control Protocol) and UDP (User Datagram Protocol)
```

## TCP - Transmission Control Protocol

> The most widely used protocol, having lots of other protocols based on it, like http.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TCP is the most widely used protocol. A lot of other protocols are based on it, including HTTP.
```

Key points:
* Connection-oriented – Establishes a connection before data transfer (via a three-way handshake: 
  * SYN (Synchronize) – Client sends a SYN packet to request a connection.
  * SYN-ACK (Synchronize-Acknowledge) – Server responds with SYN-ACK to acknowledge the request.
  * ACK (Acknowledge) – Client sends an ACK to confirm the connection is established.
* Reliable – Ensures all data is received in the correct order with retransmissions if packets are lost.
* Error checking – Uses checksums and acknowledgments to verify data integrity.
* Flow control – Adjusts data transmission speed based on network conditions.

> This is used anywhere you need a reliable connectivity without any packet loss.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TCP is used when you need a reliable connectivity without any packet loss.
```

If humans spoke with each-other following the TCP rules, it would look something like this:
{{< figure src="/images/module2/tcp-humans.png" >}}

### What protocols do I use that are TCP based?

> * HTTP/S - Used for web browsing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* HTTP/S - Web browsing
```

> * SMTP, IMAP, POP3 - email

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* SMTP, IMAP, POP3 - Email
```

* FTP - File Transfer protocol

> * SSH - remote access

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* SSH - Remote access
```

## UDP - User Datagram Protocol
Key points:
* Connectionless – No handshake; data is sent without establishing a connection.
* Fast but unreliable – No retransmissions or guaranteed order of delivery.
* Minimal overhead – Less processing and lower latency.

> This is mainly used for when reliability is not a top priority like Live Streaming (VoIP, video, online gaming). Video streaming services like Netflix will **not** use UDP as they have reliability as a requirement.

Reviewer 2: UDP is mainly used when speed and simplicity are prioritised over reliability, like Live Streaming (VoIP, video, online gaming). Video streaming services like Netflix will **not** use UDP as they have reliability as a requirement.

> This is mainly used for when reliability is not a top priority like Live Streaming (VoIP, video, online gaming). Video streaming services like Netflix will **not** use UDP as they have reliability as a requirement.

Reviewer 2: UDP is mainly used when speed and simplicity are prioritised over reliability, like Live Streaming (VoIP, video, online gaming). Video streaming services like Netflix will **not** use UDP as they have reliability as a requirement.

> This is mainly used for when reliability is not a top priority like Live Streaming (VoIP, video, online gaming). Video streaming services like Netflix will **not** use UDP as they have reliability as a requirement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
UDP is mainly used when speed and simplicity are prioritised over reliability, like Live Streaming (VoIP, video, online gaming). Video streaming services like Netflix will **not** use UDP as they have reliability as a requirement.
```

> UDP is mainly used when speed and simplicity are prioritised over reliability, like Live Streaming (VoIP, video, online gaming). Video streaming services like Netflix will **not** use UDP as they have reliability as a requirement.

Reviewer 3: I would re-iterate here that those are layer 4 protocols so that we tie the module nicely together.
